I'd say Hegel yourself and Tilek are my biggest influences, theological, that's a that's a beautiful thing to say.
I'm going to have to take a snippet of that.
I'm not worthy to tie their sandals, but I love but I those are two thinkers I deeply respect.
And you know, you've you've hit on Hegel and Tilek as as very profound thinkers who I have sucked so much from.
Yeah, yeah, certainly because Tilek talks about and this probably connects to your idea that this T is some an atheist and they aren't as diametrically opposed or perhaps they are.
But at least there's a dance between them that that goes on.
And so Tilek says that a non being is a part of being in a kind of a dialectical sense.
And this probably gets me to one of your most interesting or insightful concepts.
So in many of your talks, you discuss that, you know, we have this the Kantian notion, there's the there's what we can perceive what we can what we can know.
And then he called it the thing in itself or that which we can't know or to use a lekinian term, I don't know if it's a proper term like that's ding or whatnot.
But then you say, oh, but what what Hegel did was Hegel said that this thing that was epistemological, he kind of says no, it's ontological.
So if if he could let's I hope this is not going to sound like patronizing.
But if he could, let's say, take that idea of the what's epistemological and bringing it to the bringing it to the taking it to the ontological domain to the readers of to the audience that you wrote this book for how not to speak of God, which
are people that aren't particularly too keen on philosophy, let's say, how would you articulate that that concept?
Yeah, okay, that's that's great.
I'll tell you, I'll say where I start with that question.
And then we maybe go a little bit deeper.
But that book that you held up there, which is my first book, how not to speak of God, that was written partly to introduce people to the richness of the mystical tradition and to the kind of the first kind of understanding
of how atheism interacts with theism, which is where you get it in pseudo Dionysius and you get it and basically mystics right the way through to, you know, their their heyday was obviously in the past, but you still get some mystical thinkers in the modern world.
And it was this idea that doubt, unknowing and complexity are not opposed to the life of faith but are part of the life of faith.
And that concept, kind of introducing that, I think that was, especially when I wrote that book within some circles, both theistic and atheistic was the idea that that religion was a thing of certainty, was a thing of banishing doubt, of banishing unknowing, of having or pretending to have
certainty and satisfaction.
And I, using Tillich is very good at this actually is arguing that in the life of faith, there is an ongoing conversation like almost being invited into theology is being invited into a conversation.
It's almost like going to an art gallery and, you know, instead of thinking that what unifies you with other people who love the same artist is that you have the correct interpretation of the same art.
It's more that you're all in love with the same art, and it speaks to you in different ways and when you go to the art gallery, you, and you engage with the art, you, you allow it to saturate you you allow it to speak to you in every new ways.
Theology and this is very true in the Jewish tradition. It's not an invitation into a set of dogmatic beliefs. It's an invitation into a set of questions and a set of conversations and a set of rituals and practices.
So that was kind of the notion of the book, but I don't want to stop there and you know you mentioned the difference between epistemological unknowing and ontological unknowing and that's very key.
So epistemological unknowing for your listeners and watchers is basically the idea that there are things that we do not know.
And of course there's loads of things we don't know and I watch YouTube videos and stuff I don't know all the time I actually watch computer stuff sometimes because it's an area I don't know anything about and so I'll fall asleep listening to how what a chip is how a computer works right so there's all these things that I don't know.
And then on top of that, that idea that there's things I don't know but I could know right so there's that kind of unknowing.
There's also unknowing of things that none of us know at the moment, but maybe in the future we'll know so the idea that science is progressing and there's things in terms of physics and quantum particles that we don't currently know that you know how they interact in certain ways and
you know etc what you know what how the weak force and quantum gravity works whatever we do but we'll one day will know.
And then there's the Kantian notion which you mentioned which is, is there a type of reality that we can never know because we filter it through our minds we filter it through our senses we filter it through language so there is a reality that is always unknown to us it is knowable and it as
and it knows itself it can kind of it is a whole and substantive thing but we cannot know it.
So, those are three types of epistemological unknowns ontological unknowing is kind of this is where it gets more radical I think I think confessional Christianity can embrace all of the epistemological unknowing in fact I think at its most mature form.
It does that.
What I want to argue for and you know people don't have to go with me on this but I'll set it out.
It's something a little bit more radical and this if you allow me to tell a story that please do I love your stories go for it.
This is actually a story that I told like 30 years ago for 30 years when I first started as a public speaker.
And I then dropped it and I've only been telling it again very recently.
And so the story is about three people who all die on the same day in different parts of the world right this mystic, this pastor and this fundamentalist preacher.
And they all go up to heaven and as you know you have to get an interview with Jesus before you get into heaven right Matthew 14 so you have to they're all sitting there and
St. Paul comes out and says to the mystic okay your turn for the the interview so the mystic goes in little signs turned around on the door.
The mystic's in there for about an hour and then he totters out and he smiles to himself and goes I knew I was wrong I knew I was wrong and kind of walks into heaven.
Next is the pastor's turn this evangelical pastor, he gets up, goes into the interview room. He's in there for about three hours, and he comes out but he's distraught because how could I have been so wrong.
And then he walks into heaven. And then finally is the fundamentalist turn and he gets up he's got a well worn Bible with all of this highlighting.
He walks into the office. It's closed little signs turned around. He's in there for about eight hours and finally the door swings open and Jesus comes out and says hi could I have been so wrong.
Right.
You know that's a but himself. Yes, yes, exactly. So that's a funny little story that that when I told it originally.
I told it naively and by naively I mean I told it going, we're supposed to identify with the mystic right in that story. It's kind of a little funny ha ha, and the mystic is the one who's right the fundamentalist is wrong, right.
Recently, I would say that I've been telling it going no no no the fundamentalist is the one who is right, or I'll say in a more precise way the fundamentalist is the one who experienced salvation in this moment in the interview room.
Because what happened is the fundamentalist and let's think of it as any young militant believer I mean any young militant anything but say a believer who knows the answer knows the truth.
And then they interrogate it. They're always interrogating the truth. They know the truth they ask questions, just like when I went to philosophy class as a 20 something year old, I already knew all the answers.
I just needed philosophy to give me the justification for it right I was that I was that confident.
And what happened is I discovered that the lecturers didn't know, right and Heidegger talks about this he says it's not the students don't know and the lecturers know the students all know and the lecturers don't.
The role of the lecturer in a sense is to bring you into a learned on knowing to kind of open you up to a series of quit productive questions become an hysteric inside one of the terms right.
So, in this story, the mystic is the one who is a canteen, it's epistemological on knowing hey I don't know the truth the truth is out there but I don't know it.
The fundamentalist encounter something absolutely traumatic a subjective destitution you call it right because what is the fundamentalist experience in questioning the absolute and questioning absolute truth absolute truth breaks and says I don't know.
So he discovers that there is an unknowing or an alienation at the heart of reality itself.
Now, for me, that is the name of a type of salvation, because, and here it is in a nutshell is we as human beings are marked, and we can, we can unpack this, but marked by a fundamental sense of lack to be a human is to be marked with a sense of something
and oceanic oneness that we do not have, and everyone's promising that you can fill out with psychedelics commodity satisfaction polyamory whatever you want you know, you know, new car, everyone's got an answer to how to fill fill the lack.
And, and, and, and the most religious place in the world is actually LA right because everyone there is promising certainly a satisfaction and wholeness and completeness and on Instagram everybody seems to be unconstrained but if you go with this idea that we have a lot.
And then we encounter religion we kind of go, God lacks the lack, and we want to be unified with the absolute, so that we can get rid of this sense of alienation.
Well salvation in the radical tradition is the realization that God is alienated as well that lack or nothingness orchestration is is woven into the very nature of reality.
And actually how we overcome alienation is by is not by overcoming it but by redoubling it by by realizing that our own unhappiness or own dissatisfaction is actually part of the nature of everything.
And that actually, it's a, it's a satisfying dissatisfaction that's where all of our meaning and all of our suffering and all of our joy arises from.
And so, in Christianity I would argue that what you have in the death of God is the idea that I feel that I'm alienated from God, and this is awful.
And then in Christ I say oh God's alienated from God.
And in that experience of that of division within everything, it loses death loses its thing. It loses its way that lack loses its, its, its, its negative power and becomes something affirmative.
That's ontological unknowing so so epistemological unknowing is I do not know the absolute ontological knowing is the absolute does not know itself. There is novelty spontaneity and unknowing at the heart of everything.
And then the kind of the theological land you draw is along with the Jack is this is where Christ goes on the cross.
Father Father, why have that forsaken me and that is that moment where God himself that's the ontological unknowing kind of yes, portrayed in the Bible, let's say right.
Yeah, and potentially, like that's that's the explosion of this idea within religion you have. I mean, the idea of us being separated from some oceanic oneness is common and everything even in certain forms of therapy the idea of the mother, you're
separated from the mother other, and that's basically separation from this, you know, this being at the mother's breast this oneness. So that's a form of that as well where it's a basically original blessing fall, and then return.
That's the kind of religious paradigm. The, this instead is saying something more radical, which is that.
I mean, in a nutshell is that the separation from the mother is what creates us it's not that we have a unity and then we're separated is that subjectivity is the result of a fundamental death a fundamental loss.
So it, it constitutes us, which is what in theology you call original sin or meaning original lack there's a constitutive lack that is within us, and you don't get rid of the lack, you forgive the lack.
So, to pay a debt means to fill it if I owe you 100 bucks, and someone pays that debt that the debt is like a lack there's a lack of money and the someone pays it. If someone for if you forgive the debt, you don't fill it.
You render the lack of lacking you render the nothing and nothing. So the forgiveness of lack simply means that you don't overcome it, but somehow you learn to live within it, and it's robbed of its, its poison.